

===== PAGE 1 =====

CacheBlend: Fast Large Language Model Serving for
RAG with Cached Knowledge Fusion
Jiayi Yao
University of Chicago/CUHK Shenzhen
Hanchen Li
University of Chicago
Yuhan Liu
University of Chicago
Siddhant Ray
University of Chicago
Yihua Cheng
University of Chicago
Qizheng Zhang
Stanford University
Kuntai Du
University of Chicago
Shan Lu
Microsoft Research / University of
Chicago
Junchen Jiang
University of Chicago
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) often incorporate multiple
text chunks in their inputs to provide the necessary contexts.
To speed up the prefill of the long LLM inputs, one can
pre-compute the KV cache of a text and re-use the KV cache
when the context is reused as the prefix of another LLM input.
However, the reused text chunks are not always the input
prefix, which makes precomputed KV caches not directly
usable since they ignore the text’scross-attention with the
preceding texts. Thus, the benefits of reusing KV caches
remain largely unrealized.
This paper tackles just one challenge: when an LLM in-
put contains multiple text chunks, how to quickly combine
their precomputed KV caches in order to achieve the same
generation quality as the expensive full prefill ( i.e., with-
out reusing KV cache)? This challenge naturally arises in
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) where the input is
supplemented with multiple retrieved texts as the context.
We present CacheBlend, a scheme that reuses the pre-
computed KV caches, regardless prefix or not, and selec-
tively recomputes the KV values of a small subset of tokens
to partially update each reused KV cache. In the meantime,
the small extra delay for recomputing some tokens can be
pipelined with the retrieval of KV caches within the same job,
allowing CacheBlend to store KV caches in slower devices
with more storage capacity while retrieving them without
increasing the inference delay. By comparing CacheBlend
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
EuroSys ’25, March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotterdam, Netherlands
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1196-1/25/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3689031.3696098
with the state-of-the-art KV cache reusing schemes on three
open-source LLMs of various sizes and four popular bench-
mark datasets of different tasks, we show that CacheBlend
reduces time-to-first-token (TTFT) by 2.2–3.3× and increases
the inference throughput by 2.8-5× from full KV recompute
without compromising generation quality. The code is avail-
able at https://github.com/LMCache/LMCache.
CCS Concepts •Computing methodologies → Natural
language processing; •Networks → Cloud computing;
•Information systems → Data management systems.
Keywords Large Language Models, KV Cache, Retrieval-
Augmented-Generation
ACM Reference Format:
Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng,
Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu, and Junchen Jiang. 2025.
CacheBlend: Fast Large Language Model Serving for RAG with
Cached Knowledge Fusion. In Twentieth European Conference on
Computer Systems (EuroSys ’25), March 30–April 3, 2025, Rotter-
dam, Netherlands. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3689031.3696098
1 Introduction
For their remarkable capabilities, large language models
(LLMs) are widely used in personal assistance, AI healthcare,
and question answering [1, 3, 4, 9]. To ensure high-quality
and consistent responses, applications often supplement the
user query with additional texts to provide the necessary
context of domain knowledge or user-specific information. A
typical example is Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
where a user query will be prepended by multipletext chunks
retrieved from a database to form the LLM input.
These context text chunks, however, significantly slow
down LLM inference. This is because, before generating any
token, an LLM first uses prefill to go through the entire LLM
input to produce the KV cache —concatenation of tensors
associated with each input token that embeds the token’s
“attention” with its preceding tokens. Thus, the prefill delay
determines the time to first token (TTFT). We refer to it as
1
arXiv:2405.16444v3  [cs.LG]  3 Apr 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====

Chunk 1 Chunk 2 Chunk 3
Chunk 2 Chunk 3
(c) Prior work: Full KV reuse.Reusing all KV caches, ignoring cross-attention
(b) Prior work: Prefix caching.Only reusing prefix's KV cache
(a) Default: Full KV re-compute. Prefill on entire input
Slowest
Marginally faster
Much faster
KV Cache 1
KV Cache 1KV Cache 2KV Cache 3
LLM input
Prefix's KV cache
Stored KV caches
KV cache of [1, 2, 3]
KV cache of [1, 2, 3]
KV cache of [1, 2, 3]
(d) CacheBlend(ours): Selective KV re-compute.Reusing all KV caches but re-computing a small fraction of KV
Much fasterKV Cache 1KV Cache 2KV Cache 3
Stored KV cachesKV cache of [1, 2, 3]
Low quality
Good quality
Ignore cross-attention
Good quality
Good quality
Figure 1. Contrasting full KV recompute, prefix caching, full
KV reuse, and CacheBlend’s selective KV recompute.
full KV recompute (Figure 1(a)). Despite many optimizations,
the delay and computation of prefill grow super-linearly
with the input length, and can easily slow down the service,
especially on long LLM inputs (e.g., in RAG) [11, 53, 60].
So, how do we speed up the prefill of LLM inputs? Recent
optimizations embrace the fact that same context texts are
often reused by different LLM inputs. They thenpre-compute
the KV caches of these texts once and re-use the stored KV
caches to avoid repeated prefill on these reused texts.
Limitations of existing methods: There are currently
two approaches to KV cache reusing, but they both have
limitations.
First, prefix caching only stores and reuses the KV cache of
the prefix of the LLM input [33, 36, 41, 42, 59] (Figure 1(b)).
Because the prefix’s KV cache is independent of the succeed-
ing texts, prefix caching does not hurt generation quality.
However, many applications, such as RAG, include multiple
text chunks, rather than one, in the LLM input to provide all
necessary contexts to ensure good response quality. Thus,
only the first text chunk is the prefix, and other reused texts’
KV caches are not reused. As a result, the speed of prefix
caching will be almost as slow as full KV recompute when
input consists of many reused text chunks.
Second, full KV reuse aims to address this shortcoming
(Figure 1(c)). When a reused text is not at the input prefix, it
still reuses the KV cache by adjusting its positional embed-
ding so that the LLM generation will produce meaningful
output [24]. However, this method ignores the important
cross-attention—the attention between tokens in one chunk
with tokens in its preceding chunks. The cross-attention in-
formation cannot be pre-computed as the preceding chunks
are not known in advance. Yet, cross-attention can be vital to
answer queries (e.g., about geopolitics) that naturally require
understanding information from multiple chunksjointly (e.g.,
chunks about geography and chunks about politics). §3.3
offers concrete examples to illustrate when prefix caching
and modular caching are insufficient.
Our approach: This paper tackles only one challenge: when
an LLM input includes multiple text chunks, how to quickly
combine their individually pre-computed KV caches, in order
to achieve the same generation quality as the expensive full
prefill? In other words, we seek to have both the speed offull
KV reuse and the generation quality of full KV recompute.
We present CacheBlend, a system that fuses multiple
pre-computed KV caches, regardless of prefix or not, by
selectively recomputing the KV cache of a small fraction of
tokens, based on the preceding texts in the specific LLM input.
We refer to it as selective KV recompute (Figure 1(d)). At
a high level, selective KV recompute performs prefill on the
input text in a traditional layer-by-layer fashion; however,
in each layer, it updates the KV of only a small fraction of
tokens while reusing the KV of other tokens.
Comparing with full KV recompute, an update fraction of
less than 15% can typically generate same-quality responses
based on our experience. The deeper reason why it suffices
to only updating a small fraction of KV is due to the sparsity
of attention matrices (see §4.3).
Comparing with full KV reuse, CacheBlend achieves
higher generation quality with a small amount of extra KV
update. Moreover, this small extra computation does not
increase the inference latency, because CacheBlend par-
allelizes partial KV update on one layer with the fetching
of the KV cache on the next layer into GPU memory. Such
pipelining enables CacheBlend to store KV caches in slower
non-volatile devices (e.g., disk) without incurring extra delay,
allowing more KV caches to be stored and reused.
To put our contribution in context, CacheBlend enables
the reusing of KV caches of multiple text chunks in one
LLM input, without compromising generation quality. This
is complementary to the recent work that reduces KV cache
storage sizes [28, 35, 42, 43, 45, 58] and optimizes the access
patterns of KV cache [33, 59].
We implemented CacheBlend on top of vLLM and com-
pared CacheBlend with state-of-the-art KV cache reusing
schemes on three open-source LLMs of various sizes and
three popular benchmark datasets of two LLM tasks (RAG
and QA). We show that compared to prefix caching,CacheBlend
reduces time-to-first-token (TTFT) by 2.2–3.3× and increases
the inference throughput by 2.8–5×, without compromising
generation quality or incurring more storage cost. Compared
to full KV reuse, CacheBlend achieves almost the same
TTFT but 0.1-0.2 higher absolute F1-scores on QA tasks and
0.03-0.25 higher absolute Rouge-L scores on summarization.
2 Background
Most LLM services today use transformers [13, 16, 52]. After
receiving the input tokens, the LLM first uses the prefill
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

phase (explained shortly) to transform the tokens into key
(K) and value (V) vectors,i.e., KV cache. After prefill, the LLM
then iteratively decodes (generates) the next token with the
current KV cache and appends the new K and V vectors of
the new tokens to the KV cache for the next iteration.
The prefill phase computes the KV cache layer by layer.
The input tokens embeddings on each layer are first trans-
formed into query (Q), key (K), and value (V) vectors, of
which the K and V vectors form one layer of the KV cache.
The LLM then multiplies Q and K vectors to obtain the at-
tention matrix —the attention between each token and its
preceding tokens—and does another dot product between
the (normalized and masked) attention matrix with the V
vector. The resulting vector will go through multiple neural
layers to obtain the tokens’ embeddings on the next layer.
When the KV cache of a prefix is available, the prefill
phase will only need to compute theforward attention matrix
(between the suffix tokens and the prefix tokens) on each
layer which directly affects the generated token.
The prefill phase can be slow, especially on long inputs.
For instance, on an input of four thousand tokens (a typical
context length in RAG [33]), running prefill can take three
(or six) seconds for Llama-34B (or Llama-70B) on one A40
GPU. This causes a substantial delay that users have to wait
before seeing the first word generated. Recent work also
demonstrates that prefill can be a throughput bottleneck, by
showing that getting rid of the prefill phase can double the
throughput of an LLM inference system [60].
3 Motivation
3.1 Opportunities of reusing KV caches
Recent systems try to alleviate the prefill overhead by lever-
aging the observation that in many LLM use cases, the same
texts are used repeatedly in different LLM inputs. This allows
reusing KV caches of these reused texts (explained shortly).
Text reusing is particularly prevalent when same texts
are included in the LLM input to provide necessary contexts
to ensure high and consistent response quality. To make it
more concrete, let’s consider two scenarios.
• In a company that uses LLM to manage internal records,
two queries can be “who in the IT department proposed
using RAG to enhance the customer service X during the last
all-hands meeting?” and “who from the IT department were
graduates from college Y?” While seemingly different, both
queries involve the list of employees in the IT department
as a necessary context to generate correct answers.
• Similarly, in an LLM-based application that summarizes
Arxiv papers, two queries can be “what are the trending
RAG techniques on Arxiv?” and “what datasets are used re-
cently to benchmark RAG-related papers on Arxiv?” They
both need the recent Arxiv papers about RAG as the neces-
sary context to generate correct results.
Since the reused contexts typically contain more informa-
tion than the user queries, the prefill on the “context” part of
the input accounts for the bulk of prefill overhead [22, 33].
Thus, it would be ideal to store and reuse the KV caches
of reused texts, in order to avoid the prefill overhead when
these texts are used again in different LLM inputs.
3.2 Why is prefix caching insufficient?
Indeed, several recent systems are developed to reduce prefill
delay by reusing KV caches. For example, in prefix caching,
the KV cache of a reusable text chunk is precomputed once,
and if the text chunk is at the prefix of an LLM input, then
the precomputed KV cache can be reused to avoid prefill on
the prefix. The advantage of prefix caching is that the KV
cache of a prefix is not affected by the succeeding text, so
the generation result will be identical to full KV recompute
(without the KV cache). Several systems have followed this
approach, e.g., vLLM [36], SGLang [59], and RAGCache [33].
The disadvantage of prefix caching is also clear. To an-
swer one query, applications, such as RAG, often prepend
multiple text chunks in the LLM input to provide different
contexts necessary for answering the query. 1 As a result,
except the first chunk, all other chunks’ KV caches are
not reused since they are not the prefix of the LLM input .
Let us think about the queries from §3.1. To answer “who in
the IT department proposed using RAG to enhance the customer
service X during the last all-hands meeting?”, we need contexts
from multiple sources, including IT department’s employees,
information about service X, and meeting notes from the all-
hands meeting. Similarly, in the Arxiv-summarization app,
answering the example queries will require the LLM to read
several recent RAG-related Arxiv papers as the contexts. Be-
ing on different topics, these contexts are unlikely to appear
together in one text chunk. They are separate text chunks
used together only when answering a particular query.
To empirically show the needs for including multiple text
chunks in LLM inputs, we use two popular multi-hop QA
datasets, Musique and 2WikiMQA. These datasets consist
of queries and multiple associated context texts needed to
answer the queries. Following the common practice of RAG,
we first create a vector database by splitting the contexts
into chunks of 128 tokens (a popular number [ 29]) using
the text chunking mechanism from Langchain [5]. For each
query, we embed the query using SentenceTransformers [49],
1Prepending all contexts in an LLM input is a popular way of augmenting
user queries (e.g., “stuff” mode in Langchain and LlamaIndex). By default,
this paper uses this mode. Other RAG methods like “MapReduce” or “Rerank”
do not fit in this category. They first process each context text chunk sepa-
rately before combining the results from each context. Since each chunk
is always the prefix when processed separately, prefix caching works well.
However, “MapReduce” is slow since it needs to summarize every chunk
before generating the answer from summaries. “Rerank” suffers from low
generation quality if multiple chunks contain relevant information as it
processes every chunk individually. We also empirically evaluate these
methods and compare them with CacheBlend in §7.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

5 15 25 35 45
# relevant chunks in LLM input
(a) Musique
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35F1-Score
Benefit of cross- 
chunk attention 
in KV cache
5 15 25 35
# relevant chunks in LLM input
(b) 2WikiMQA
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35F1-Score
Benefit of cross- 
chunk attention 
in KV cache
Full KV recompute (w/ cross attention) Full KV reuse (w/o cross attention)
Figure 2. Generation quality improves as more text chunks
are retrieved.
and fetch top-k relevant chunks from the database, based on
the least L2 distance between the embeddings of the query
and the chunk respectively. Figure 2 shows the generation
quality, measured using a standard F1-score metric, with an
increasing number of selected text chunks. We can see that
the quality improves significantly as more text chunks are
retrieved to supplement the LLM input, though including
too many chunks hurts quality due to the well-known lost-
in-the-middle issue [40, 54].
In short, prefix caching can only save the prefill of the first
text chunk, so the saving will be marginal when the LLM
input includes more text chunks, even if they are reused.
3.3 Why is full KV reuse insufficient?
Full KV reuse is proposed to address this very problem. This
approach is recently pioneered by PromptCache [24]. It con-
catenates independently precomputed KV caches of recur-
ring text chunks with the help of buffers to maintain the
positional accuracy of each text chunk. For instance, to con-
catenate the KV caches of chunks 𝐶1 and 𝐶2, PromptCache
first needs to precompute the KV cache of𝐶2 by running pre-
fill on a hypothetical input that prepends 𝐶2 with a dummy
prefix of length greater or equal to 𝐶1. This way, even if 𝐶2
is not the prefix, we still correctly preserve the positional
information of𝐶2’s KV cache, though each chunk’s KV cache
will have to be precomputed multiple times.
However, even with the positional information preserved,
a more fundamental problem is that the KV cache of non-
prefix text chunk (e.g., 𝐶2) ignores the cross-attention be-
tween the chunk and the preceding text ( e.g., 𝐶1). This is
because the preceding text is not known when precomput-
ing the KV cache.
Ignoring cross-attention can lead to a wrong response.
Figure 3 shows an illustrative example, where a user query
"How many goals did Messi score more than Cristiano Ronaldo
at FIFA World Cups?" is prepended by the two text chunks
of the players’ career statistics. With full prefill or prefix
caching, the result is clear and correct. With full KV reuse
the KV caches of the two text chunks are precomputed, with
each chunk having the right positional embedding, and then
concatenated to form the KV cache. However, if the LLM
"Lionel Messi scored 13 goals at FIFA World Cups.\n"
"Cristiano scored 8 goals at FIFA World Cups.\n"
"Who scored more goals at FIFA World Cups, Messi or Ronaldo?\n"
"Lionel Messi scored more goals than at FIFA World Cups than Cristiano Ronaldo.\n"
"The question is asking for information about FIFA World Cups. The names of Messi and Ronaldo are well-known …"
Chunk 1Chunk 2Query
Chunk 1
Chunk 2
+ Query
+ QueryKV cache Chunk 1KV cache Chunk 2
LLM
LLM
(b) Full KV recompute gives correct answer.
(a) Setup: Query and two relevant text chunks.
(c) Full KV reuse gives wrong answer.
Figure 3. An illustrative example of an LLM input with two
text chunks prepended to a query. Full KV recompute (b), with-
out reusing KV cache, is slow but gives the correct answer. Full
KV reuse (c), however, gives the wrong answer as it neglects
cross-attention between the chunks (Figure 4).
uses this KV cache to generate the answer, it will start to
ramble and not produce the right answer.
To understand why, we take a closer look at theattention
matrix (explained in §2), particularly the cross-attention
between the two text chunks talking about the players’ sta-
tistics. Figure 4 visualizes the attention matrix resulting from
the KV cache of the original (full) prefill and the KV cache of
full KV reuse. Since full KV reuse precomputes each chunk
separately, the cross attention between two chunks is com-
pletely missed (never computed) when the KV caches are pre-
computed. In this example, the first chunk contains Messi’s
goal count and the second chunk contains Ronaldo’s. The
LLM is queried to compare the goal counts between Messi
and Ronaldo. Neglecting the interaction (cross-attention)
between two chunks would lead to a flawed answer.
In fairness, it should be noted that full KV reuse does work
when the cross-attention between chunks is low. This can
commonly occur with prompt templates which are the main
target application of PromptCache [24].
The absence of cross-attention in full KV reuse causes
significant discrepancies in the forward attention matrix
(explained in §2), which contains the attention between con-
text tokens and the last few tokens, and directly affects the
generated tokens.
To show the prevalence of cross-attention in multi-chunk
LLM inputs, Figure 2 contrasts the response quality (in F1
score) between full KV recompute (with cross-attention) and
full KV reuse (without cross-attention). We can see that as the
number of relevant chunks increases, the disparity between
full prefill and modular caching becomes more pronounced.
This is because, with a larger number of chunks, the amount
of cross-referencing and interdependency between different
parts of the input (cross-attention) increases.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

(a) Full KV recompute (correct cross-attention)
(b) Full KV reuse (ignoring cross-attention)
Cross-attention
Attention matrix
Forward-attention
Forward-attentionCross-attention
Attention matrix
Figure 4. Contrasting the attention matrices of (a) full KV
recompute and (b) full KV reuse. The yellow boxes highlight the
cross-attention. The right-hand side plots show the resulting
forward attention matrices whose discrepancies are a result of
the different cross-attention between the two methods.
4 Fast KV Cache Fusing
Given thatfull KV recompute (i.e., full prefill or prefix caching)
can be too slow while full KV reuse has low quality, a natural
question then is how to have both the speed of full KV reuse
and the quality of full KV recompute. Our goal, therefore, is
the following:
Goal. When an LLM input includes multiple re-used text
chunks, how to quickly update the pre-computed KV cache,
such that the forward attention matrix (and subsequently the
output text) has minimum difference with the one produced
by full KV recompute.
To achieve our goal, we present CacheBlend, which
recomputes the KV of a selective subset of tokens on each
layer while reusing other tokens’ KV.2 This section explains
CacheBlend in three parts. We begin with the notations
(§4.1), and then describe how to recompute the KV of only
a small subset of tokens (§4.2), and finally explain how to
select the tokens on each layer whose KV will be recomputed
(§4.3).
4.1 Terminology
Table 1 summarizes the notations used in this section. For
a given list of 𝑁 text chunks, we use 𝐾𝑉 full to denote the
KV cache from full KV recompute, 𝐾𝑉 pre to denote the pre-
computed KV cache, and 𝐾𝑉 new to denote the CacheBlend-
updated KV cache. Here, each of these KV caches is a concate-
nation of KV caches associated with different text chunks.
Each layer 𝑖 of the KV cache, 𝐾𝑉𝑖, produces the forward
attention matrix 𝐴𝑖.
2For simplicity, we use the terms KV and KV cache interchangeably.
Notation Description
𝑖
𝑗
Layer index
Token index
𝐾𝑉
𝐾𝑉𝑖
𝐾𝑉𝑖 [ 𝑗]
𝐾𝑉 full
𝐾𝑉 pre
𝐾𝑉 new
KV cache
KV on layer 𝑖
KV on layer 𝑖 at token 𝑗
Fully recomputed KV cache
Pre-computed KV cache
CacheBlend-updated KV cache
𝐴𝑖
𝐴full
𝑖
𝐴pre
𝑖
𝐴new
𝑖
Forward attention matrix on layer 𝑖
Forward attention matrix of full KV recompute
Forward attention matrix of full KV reuse
Forward attention matrix with CacheBlend
Δkv (𝐾𝑉𝑖, 𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 ) [𝑗] KV deviation between 𝐾𝑉𝑖 [ 𝑗] and 𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 [ 𝑗]
Δattn (𝐴𝑖, 𝐴full
𝑖 ) Attention deviation between 𝐴𝑖 and 𝐴full
𝑖
Table 1. Summary of terminology
The difference between the full KV recompute (full prefill)
and the full KV re-use is two-fold.
• KV deviation: We define the KV deviation of a KV cache
𝐾𝑉 on layer 𝑖 of token 𝑗 as the absolute difference between
𝐾𝑉𝑖 [ 𝑗] and 𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 [ 𝑗], denoted as Δkv (𝐾𝑉𝑖, 𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 ) [𝑗]. It
measures how much different the given KV is on a particu-
lar token and layer compared to the full-prefilled KV cache.
We will later use the KV deviation to identify which tokens’
KV has higher deviation and thus need to be updated.
• Attention deviation: Similarly, for the forward attention
matrix 𝐴𝑖 on layer 𝑖, we define the attention deviation, de-
noted as Δattn(𝐴𝑖, 𝐴full
𝑖 ), to be the L-2 norm of its difference
with 𝐴full
𝑖 . Recall from §3.3 that full KV reuse suffers from
deviation in the forward attention matrix (illustrated in
Figure 4) due to the absence of cross-attention.
Using these notations, our goal can be formulated as how
to quickly update the precomputed KV cache 𝐾𝑉 pre to the
new KV cache 𝐾𝑉 new, such that the attention deviation
Δattn(𝐴new
𝑖 , 𝐴full
𝑖 ) on any layer 𝑖, is minimized.
4.2 Selectively recomputing KV cache
For now, let us assume we have already selected a subset of
tokens to recompute on each layer (we will explain how to
select them in §4.3). Here, we describe how CacheBlend
recomputes the KV of these selected tokens on each layer.
Workflow: The default implementation of prefill (depicted
in Figure 5(a)) does not “skip” tokens while only computes
the KV of a subset of tokens. Instead, CacheBlend runs the
following steps (depicted in Figure 5(b)):
• It first applies a mask on the input of each layer𝑖 to reduce
it to a subset of selected tokens.
• It then transforms the reduced input into the 𝑄𝑖, 𝐾𝑖 and 𝑉𝑖
vectors will also be restricted to the selected tokens.
• It then expands the 𝐾𝑖 vector and 𝑉𝑖 vector by reusing the
KV cache entries associated with the un-selected tokens
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

𝑄! 𝐾! 𝑉!Attn Matrix
𝑄!𝐾! 𝑉!Attn Matrix
(a) Full KV recompute for reference
(b) Selective KV recomputeon two selected tokens
Re-usedRe-computed
Input on layer 𝑖 Input on layer 𝑖+1
…
… …
…
Input on layer 𝑖 Input on layer 𝑖+1
next layer
next layer
Figure 5. Illustrated contrast between (a) full KV recompute
and (b) selective KV recompute on one layer.
0 10 20 30 40 50
Recomputation ratio (%)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Forward
attention deviation
Mistral-7B
Yi-34B
Llama-70B
Figure 6. Attention deviation reduces as we recompute the
KV of more tokens on each layer. Importantly, the biggest drop
in attention deviation results from recomputing the KV of the
tokens with the highest KV deviation (i.e., HKVD tokens).
on layer 𝑖, so that the attention matrix includes attention
between selected tokens and all other tokens.
• Finally, it runs the same attention module to produce the
input of the next layer.
These changes make little assumption on the exact trans-
former process and can be integrated with many popular
transformers (more details in §6). It is important to notice
that the compute overhead is proportional to the number
of selected tokens. This is because it only runs computation
associated with the selected tokens. If we recompute 𝑟 % of
tokens per layer, the total compute overhead will be 𝑟 % of
full prefill.
4.3 Selecting which tokens to recompute
Next, we explain how to choose the tokens whose KV should
be recomputed on each layer in order to reduce the attention
deviation on each layer, which results from the KV deviation.
Our intuition, therefore, is to prioritize recomputing the
KV of tokens who have high KV deviations. Of course, this
intuitive scheme is not feasible as it needs to know full-
prefilled KV cache, and we will make it practical shortly.
To show the effectiveness of selecting tokens with high
KV deviations, Figure 6 uses three models on the dataset of
Musique (please see §7.1 for details). It shows the change of
average attention deviation across all layers𝑖, Δattn(𝐴𝑖, 𝐴full
𝑖 ),
after we use the aforementioned scheme (§4.2) to select and
recompute the 𝑟 % of tokens 𝑗 who have the highest KV devia-
tion Δkv(𝐾𝑉𝑖, 𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 ) [𝑗]. As the recompute ratio (𝑟) increases,
we can see that the attention deviation gradually reduces,
and the biggest drops happen when the top few tokens with
the highest KV deviations are recomputed. Empirically, it
suggests the following insight.
Insight 1. On layer 𝑖, recomputing the KV of token 𝑗 who has
a higher KV deviation (i.e., Δkv (𝐾𝑉𝑖, 𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 ) [𝑗]) reduces the
attention deviation (i.e., Δattn (𝐴𝑖, 𝐴full
𝑖 )) by a greater amount.
Thus, if we recompute the KV of, say 10%, of tokens on
a layer 𝑖, we should choose the 10% of tokens which have
the highest KV deviations.3 We refer to these tokens as the
High-KV-Deviation (or HKVD) tokens on layer 𝑖.
Now that we know we should recompute KV for the
HKVD tokens, two natural questions arise.
Do we need to recompute KV for most tokens? In §7,
we empirically show that choosing 10-20% tokens as HKVD
tokens and recomputing their KV suffices to greatly reduce
the attention deviation and preserve generation quality.
This can be intuitively explained by attention sparsity, a
well-studied property observed in many transformer models
by prior research [14, 15, 43, 58]. It says that in an attention
matrix, high attention typically only occurs between a small
number of tokens and their preceding tokens. To validate
this observation, Figure 7 uses the same models and dataset
as Figure 6. It shows the distribution of KV deviation on
one layer. We can see that a small fraction, about 10-15%, of
tokens have much higher KV deviation than others, which
corroborates the sparsity of cross-attention.
If a token has very low attention with other chunks’ tokens
(i.e., low cross-attention with other chunks), the KV deviation
between 𝐴pre and 𝐴full will be low and thus do not need to
be recomputed. Only when a token has a high attention with
other chunks (high KV deviation compared with ground
truth), should its KV be recomputed.
How to identify the HKVD tokens without knowing
the true KV values or attention matrix? Naively, to iden-
tify the HKVD tokens, one must know the fully recomputed
𝐾𝑉 full
𝑖 of each layer 𝑖 in the first place, but doing so is too
3In the precomputed KV cache, the K vector of each chunk must be ad-
justed with the correct positional embedding. In SOTA positional embed-
ding scheme (Rotary Positional Embedding or ROPE [ 50]), this correc-
tion is done simply by multiplying the K vector by a rotation matrix ofcos 𝑚𝜃 − sin 𝑚𝜃
sin 𝑚𝜃 cos 𝑚𝜃

. (The n-dimensional case in Appendix A) This step
has negligible overhead since the multiplication is performed only once.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

0 20 40 60
KV deviation
(a) Mistral-7B
0.0
0.5
1.0CDF
Layer 4
Layer 5
Layer 6
0 25 50 75
KV deviation
(b) Yi-34B
0.0
0.5
1.0CDF
Layer 10
Layer 11
Layer 12
0 20 40 60
KV deviation
(c) Llama-70B
0.0
0.5
1.0CDF
Layer 4
Layer 5
Layer 6
Figure 7. Distribution of KV deviation of different tokens on
one layer.
5 vs. 6
12 vs. 1321 vs. 2231 vs. 32
Layer pairs
(a) Mistral-7B
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Spearman's rank correlation
between neighboring layers
5 vs. 6
16 vs. 1731 vs. 3246 vs. 47
Layer pairs
(b) Yi-34B
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Spearman's rank correlation
between neighboring layers
11 vs. 1221 vs. 2241 vs. 4261 vs. 62
Layer pairs
(c) Llama-70B
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Spearman's rank correlation
between neighboring layers
Figure 8. Rank correlation of the KV deviation per token be-
tween two consecutive layers.
expensive and defeats the purpose of selective KV recom-
pute. Instead, we observe that the HKVD tokens on different
layers are not independent:
Insight 2. Tokens with the highest KV deviations on one layer
are likely to have the highest KV deviations on the next layer.
For instance, if the HKVD tokens on the first layer are tokens
2, 3, and 5, these three tokens will likely also have higher
KV deviations than most other tokens on the second layer.
Figure 8 uses the same setting as Figure 7 and shows Spear-
man’s rank correlation score between the KV deviation of
tokens between two neighboring layers. The figure shows a
consistently high similarity of HKVD tokens between differ-
ent layers.4
The intuition behind this correlation lies in the previous
observation that the input embedding of each token changes
slowly between layers in transformer models [44, 47]. There-
fore, KV cache between layers should also bear similarity
as KV cache is generated from the input embedding with a
linear transformation.
Given the substantial correlation between the HKVD to-
kens, a straightforward solution is that we can perform prefill
on the first layer first, pick the HKVD tokens of the first layer,
and only update their KV on all other layers. Since an LLM
usually has over 30 layers, this process can save most of the
compute compared to full KV recompute. That said, using
only the attention deviation of different tokens on the first
layer may not be statistically reliable to pick HKVD tokens
of all layers, especially deeper layers.
4We should clarify that although the HKVD tokens are similar across layers,
the attention matrices between layers can still be quite different.
Selected HKVD tokens
Layer 𝟏 Layer 𝟐
…
KV deviation
Precomputed KVUpdated KV
Layer 𝟑
Recompute all tokens on Layer 1
Selectively recompute three tokens on Layer 2
Selectively recompute two tokens on Layer 3
Selected HKVD tokensKV deviation
Selected HKVD tokensKV deviation
Re-usedRe-computed
…
Figure 9. CacheBlend selects the HKVD (high KV deviation)
tokens of one layer by computing KV deviation of only the
HKVD tokens selected from the previous layer and selecting
the tokens among them with high KV deviation.
Thus, we opt for a gradual filtering scheme (depicted in
Figure 9). If on average we want to pick 𝑟 % HKVD tokens
per layer, we will pick 𝑟1% tokens based on the token-wise
attention deviation on the first layer, with𝑟1 being slightly
higher than 𝑟, and use them as the HKVD tokens on the
second layer. Then we recompute the KV of these𝑟1% HKVD
tokens on the second layer and pick 𝑟2% tokens that have
the highest token-wise attention deviation, with 𝑟2 slightly
less than 𝑟1, as the HKVD tokens on the next layer, and so
forth. Intuitively, this gradual-filtering scheme eventually
picks the HKVD tokens who have high attention deviation,
not only on the first layer but also on multiple layers, which
empirically is statistically more reliable to identify the HKVD
tokens on each layer.
Although the KV-cache space of the layer i performing the
HKVD calculation holds both Updated-KV and Precomputed-
KV, layer-i’s extra Precomputed-KV is immediately discarded
once the inference proceeds to layer i+1. This makes the
memory overhead in HKVD negligible.
5 CacheBlend System Design
We present a concrete system design forCacheBlend, which
reduces the impact of the selective KV recompute using the
following basic insight.
Basic insight: If the delay for selective KV recompute (§4.3) is
faster than the loading of KV into GPU memory, then properly
pipelining the selective KV recompute and KV loading makes
the extra delay of KV recompute negligible.
Pipelining KV loading and recompute: In CacheBlend,
the selective recompute of one layer can start immediately
after pre-computed the KV cache of the previous layer is
loaded into the GPU. This is because which tokens’ KV to
recompute on one layer only depends on the KV deviation
of the previous layer’s tokens. As a result, if loading the pre-
computed KV for one layer is faster or equal to selective KV
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

ForanSSDof1GB/sthroughput,thisisthebestre-computeratio(noextradelay)
w.pipelining
w/opipelining
Under15%re-computeratio,thisisthebeststoragedevice. (cheapestandnoextradelay)
(a)
(b)
Figure 10. (a) Smartly picking the recompute ratio will not
incur an extra delay. (b) Smartly picking storage device(s) to
store KVs saves cost while not increasing delay.
recompute of one layer, the KV-loading delay should be able
to hide the selective recompute delay, i.e., without incurring
any extra delay on time-to-first-token (TTFT).
Take the Llama-7B model and a 4K-long context, recom-
puting 15% of the tokens (the default recompute ratio) only
takes 3 ms per layer, while loading one layer’s KV cache takes
16 ms from an NVME SSD (§7). In this case, KV loading can
hide the delay for KV recompute on 15% of the tokens, i.e.,
KV recompute incurs no extra delay. Recomputing more to-
kens, which can slightly improve generation quality, may
not incur extra delay either, as long as the delay is below
16 ms. On the contrary, with another model, Llama-70B, re-
computing 15% of tokens takes 7 ms, but it only takes 4 ms
to load one layer’s KV from an NVME SSD. Here KV loading
does not completely hide the recompute delay. In short, a
controller is needed to intelligently pick the recompute ratio
as well as where to store the KV cache (if applicable).
5.1 Key Components
To realize the benefit of pipelining KV loading and recom-
pute, our system has three major components.
Loading Controller: We face two design questions in prac-
tice: First, given a fixed storage device to use, how to choose
a recompute ratio (what fraction of tokens to recompute KV
per layer) without incurring extra delay to time-to-first-token
(TTFT)? Figure 10(a) illustrates an example that, if we select
a recompute ratio wisely, the recompute should not cause
any extra delay to loading if loading is slow.
For this, the controller uses two delay estimators to find an
idealized recompute ratio, such that the recompute delay is
close to the loading delay. Given the recompute ratio𝑟, length
of context to be loaded 𝐿, and LLM, the recompute delay esti-
mator calculates the expected delay 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑟 %, 𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿)5.
5𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑟 %, 𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿 ) = 𝑟 % × 𝑃𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿 ). 𝑃𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿 ) is
offline profiled.
The loading delay estimator estimates the loading delay of the
KV cache of one layer,𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿, 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 _𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒 )6, based
on the LLM, the storage device’s speed (which is measured
offline), and the length of context 𝐿.
The controller calculates an idealized recomputation ratio
such that the loading delay can hide the recompute delay,
without degrading the inference quality. It first picks the
recompute ratio 𝑟 % such that 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝑟 %, 𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿) is equal
to 𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿, 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 _𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒 ), and then takes the max of
𝑟 % and 𝑟 ∗%, where 𝑟 ∗% is the minimal recompute ratio that
empirically has low negligible quality drop from full KV re-
compute. In practice, we found 𝑟 ∗% to be 15% from Figure 16.
This means that even if the storage device is a fast device (ex.
CPU RAM), the delay will be lower-bounded by the minimal
recomputation to guarantee quality.
In practice, CacheBlend faces another challenge: which
storage devices should the developer use? To solve this chal-
lenge, we present a more formulated question to the loading
controller: If we only do KV recompute of a fixed selective
recompute ratio (ex. 15%), how can we choose the right storage
device to store KVs such that no extra delay is caused? As
shown in Figure 10(b), under a fixed recompute ratio, the
controller should pick the cheapest storage device among all
devices that do not increase the delay.
In CacheBlend, the system developers can provide a list
of potential storage device(s), and the controller uses a stor-
age cost estimator which estimates the cost of storing KVs
for each device, namely 𝐶𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿, 𝑇 , 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒_𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒 ),
based on the LLM, length of context 𝐿 and time duration
𝑇 needed to store it (if it is cloud storage). Then it uses
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 (15%, 𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿) and𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿, 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 _𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒 ) to
estimate the recompute and loading delays for all devices.
Lastly, it finds out which storage device is the cheapest where
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒 ≥ 𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 . In this way, if the developer can navigate
through the different storage devices for the KV caches given
a fixed recomputation target that satisfies the generation
quality requirement.
KV cache store (mapping LLM input to KV caches) : The
KV cache store splits an LLM input into multiple text chunks,
each of which can be reused or new. For instance, a RAG
input typically consists of multiple retrieved context chunks
(likely of a fixed length) and the user input. The splitting of
LLM inputs is specific to the application, and we implement
the same strategy as described in recent work [24, 38]. Once
the input is split into text chunks, each chunk is hashed to
find their corresponding KV cache, in the same way as the
block hashing is implemented in vLLM [36]. The KV caches
of new chunks generated by the fusor (explained soon) are
added to the devices. When the storage devices are full, we
evict the least recently used KV cache. In this paper, we
only focus on storing KV cache in one single level of storage
device such as CPU RAM or SSD.
6𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 (𝐿𝐿𝑀, 𝐿, 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 _𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒 ) = 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑇 𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝐾𝑉 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒 (𝐿𝐿𝑀 ) ×𝐿
𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑝𝑢𝑡 (𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑔𝑒_𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒 ) .
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

: “Can we use drones in agriculture?”
User
 Drone Chunk #1
Drone Chunk #2
AgriChunk #1
AgriChunk#2
Potential New KV Cache
Loading Controller
CPU
SSD
Slower Disks
KV Cache StoreKV Cache Fusor
Fused KV Cache
KV Cache #1-4
“Drones   can …”
CacheBlendSystem
Figure 11. CacheBlend system (green stared) in light of LLM context augmented generation for a single request. CacheBlend
uses text provided by the retriever, interacts with the storage device(s), and provides KV cache on top of LLM inference engines.
Fusor: The cache fusor (§4) merges pre-computed KV caches
via selective recompute. Recall from §4.3, the decision of
which tokens need to be recomputed for one layer depends
on the recompute of the previous layer. Thus, the fusor waits
until the recompute for the previous layer is done, and the
KV caches for layer 𝐿 are loaded into the queue on GPU
memory and then perform selective recompute using the
recompute ratio 𝑟 % calculated by the loading controller. The
fusor repeats this process until all the layers are recomputed.
5.2 Putting them together
We put the key components together in an LLM inference
workflow in Figure 11. When a user of an LLM application
submits a question, a list of relevant text chunks will be
queried. The loading controller then queries the KV cache
manager on whether the KV caches for those text chunks
exist, and where they are stored. Next, the KV cache manager
returns this information back to the loading controller and
the controller computes the idealized selective recomputa-
tion ratio, sends it to the fusor, and loads the KV caches into
a queue in GPU memory. The KV cache fusor continuously
recomputes the KV caches in the queue, until all layers are
recomputed. Lastly, the fused KV cache is input into the LLM
inference engine, which generates the answer to the user
question based on the KV cache.
6 Implementation
We implement CacheBlend on top of vLLM with about 3K
lines of code in Python based on PyTorch v2.0.
Integrating Fusor into LLM serving engine: CacheBlend
performs the partial prefill process in a layer-wise manner
through three interfaces:
• fetch_kv(text, layer_id) -> KVCache : given a piece
of text and a layer id,CacheBlend fetches the correspond-
ing KV cache from KV store into the GPU. Returns -1 if
the KV cache is not in the system.
• prefill_layer(input_dict, KVCache) -> output_dict :
CacheBlend takes in the input and KV cache of this layer
and performs the partial prefill process for this particular
layer. The output is used as the input for the next layer.
• synchronize(): CacheBlend requires synchronization
before prefilling every layer to make sure the KV cache of
this layer has already been loaded into the GPU.
We implement these three interfaces inside vLLMs. For
fetch_kv, we first calculate the hash of the text and search
if it is inside the KV store system. If it is present, we call
torch.load() to load it into GPU memory if KV cache is
on disk or use torch.cuda() if the KV cache is inside CPU
memory. For prefill_layer, we implement this interface
on top of the original layer function in vLLM that performs
one layer of prefill. Three key-value pairs are recorded in
the input_dict: (1) the original input data input_org re-
quired for prefilling an LLM layer (e.g., input_tensor, in-
put_metadata), (2) a check_flag indicating whether HKVD
tokens will be selected in this layer, and (3) HKVD_indices
that track the indices of HKVD tokens. If check_flag is
True, the input tokens with the largest deviation between
the newly computed KV cache and the loaded KV cache will
be selected as the HKVD tokens. If check_flag is False,
partial prefill will only be performed on the current HKVD
tokens indicated by HKVD_indices. Only the KV cache of
the HKVD tokens will be computed and updated at each
layer. In the partial prefill for layer𝑖, two threads are used
to pipeline the computation (prefill_layer) of layer 𝑖 and
the KV cache loading ( fetch_kv) of the next layer 𝑖 + 1.
synchronize is called before prefill_layer to assure the
KV cache needed for prefill has been loaded into GPU.
Managing KV cache: CacheBlend manages the KV caches
such that: If KV cache is not inside the system and is recom-
puted by the LLM engine in the runtime, we will move the
KV cache into CPU by torch.cpu() and open a thread to
write it back to disk in the background with torch.save().
During fetch_kv, we go through through the hash tables to
fetch KV cache for the fusor. The hash tables are kept in CPU
for their relatively small size (16MB for one million chunks).
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Figure 12. CacheBlend reduces TTFT by 2.2-3.3 × compared to full KV recompute with negligible quality drop across four datasets
and three models.
Better Better Better Better
Figure 13. Generation quality of CacheBlend with Yi-34B vs MapReduce and MapRerank.
7 Evaluation
Our key takeaways from the evaluation are:
• TTFT reduction: Compared to full KV recompute,
CacheBlend reduces TTFT by 2.2-3.3× over several mod-
els and tasks.
• High quality: Compared with full KV reuse,CacheBlend
improves quality from 0.15 to 0.35 in F1-score and Rouge-L
score, while having no more than 0.01-0.03 quality drop
compared to full KV recompute and prefix caching.
• Higher throughput: At the same TTFT, CacheBlend
can increase throughput by up to 5× compared with full
KV recompute and 3.3× compared with prefix caching.
7.1 Setup
Models and hardware settings: We evaluateCacheBlend
on Mistral-7B[30], Yi-34B[56] and Llama-70B[2] to represent
a wide scale of open source models. Note that we apply 8-bit
model quantization to Llama-70B and Yi-34B. We run our
end-to-end experiments on Runpod GPUs [10] with 128 GB
RAM, 2 Nvidia A40 GPUs, and 1TB NVME SSD whose mea-
sured throughput is 4.8 GB/s. We use 1 GPU to serve Mistral-
7B and Yi-34B, and 2 GPUs to serve Llama-70B.
Datasets: Our evaluation covers the following datasets.
• 2WikiMQA7 [27]: This dataset aims to test LLM’s reasoning
skills by requiring the model to read multiple paragraphs
to answer a given question. We included 200 test cases,
following the dataset size of previous work [12].
• Musique7 [51]: This is a multi-document question-answering
dataset. It is designated to test LLM’s multi-hop reason-
ing ability where one reasoning step critically relies on
information from another and contains 150 test cases.
7Since the standard answers for 2WikiMQA and Musique are always less
than 5 words, we append “Answer within 5 words. ” to their prompts to
reduce the impact of answer length mismatch in F1 score calculation.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

0 2 4
0
2TTFT (s)
Mistral-7B
0.0 0.5 1.0
0
5
Yi-34B
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
0
2
4
6
8
Llama-70B
0 2 4
0
2TTFT (s)
Musique
Extended
Dataset
2WikiMQA
Extended
Dataset
0.0 0.5 1.0
Average Request Rate per Second
0
5
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
0
2
4
6
8
CacheFuse (ours) Full KV recompute Prefix Caching (RAM) Prefix Caching (RAM+SSD)
Figure 14. CacheBlend achieves lower TTFT with higher throughput in RAG scenarios compared with baselines of similar quality.
3 6 9 12
(a) Number of chunks
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5TTFT (s)
300 600 900
(b) Chunk length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2 6 10
(c) Batch size
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
CacheFuse (ours) Full KV recompute
Figure 15. CacheBlend outperforms baseline with varying
chunk numbers, chunk lengths, and batch sizes.
• SAMSum [25]: This dataset comprises multiple pairs of
dialogues and summaries, and requires the LLM to output
a summary to a new dialogue. It is intended to test the
few-shot learning ability of language models and contains
200 test cases.
• MultiNews [20]: This dataset consists of news articles and
human-written summaries of these articles from the site
newser.com. Each summary is professionally written by
editors and includes links to the original articles cited and
contains 60 sampled cases.
We split contexts into 512-token chunks with Langchain and
use the original 200-400 token chunks in SAMSum. We also
create a synthetic dataset to simulate the chunk reuse in
RAG scenarios. Specifically, we randomly pick 1500 queries
in the Musique and 2WikiMQA datasets each and build a
context chunk database by splitting each query’s context
into 512-token chunks [ 29] with Langchain [ 5]. For each
query, we use GPT4 API to generate 3 more similar queries.
In the 6000 queries (1500 original + 4500 simulated), we
retrieve the top-6 chunks8 based on L2 distance, in a random
order[34]. We refer to these datasets as Musique extended
and 2WikiMQA extended. We only report for baselines with
similar quality and skip the result for the first 1K queries as
the initial storage is completely empty.
Quality metrics: We adopt the following standard metrics
to measure the generation quality.
8Max number of chunks that fit into input token limit for Llama-70B.
• F1-score [6] is used to evaluate 2WikiMQA and Musique
datasets [12]. It measures the similarity between the model’s
output and the ground-truth answer of the question based
on the number of overlapping words.
• Rouge-L score [39] is used to evaluate MultiNews and SAM-
Sum datasets [12]. It measures the similarity between the
model’s output and the ground-truth summaries based on
the longest common sequence.
Baselines: We compare CacheBlend with the following
baselines:
• Full KV recompute: The raw texts are fed into LLM as input.
The LLM calculates KV cache of all tokens during prefill.
• Prefix caching [33, 36, 59]: We adopt the techniques from
SGLang [59] to identify the frequently used prefix chunks
and store their KV caches in both RAM and SSD. The KV
cache of non-prefix tokens needs to be computed during
prefill. We also make an idealized assumption in favor of
prefix caching that there is no loading delay from RAM
or SSD to GPU. This assumption makes it perform better
than it would under real-world conditions.
• Full KV reuse [24]: We implement full KV reuse by using
the approach proposed in PromptCache [24]. We append
a buffer before the text to prepare its KV cache to be used
in different positions with correct positional encoding.
We did not compare with the scaffolding scheme since
its application to RAG scenarios requires human users to
manually select important chunks at runtime.
• MapReduce [7]: Different from traditional MapReduce [18],
this is an alternative RAG method in LangChain. The LLM
first summarises all chunks in parallel and concatenates
them together. The concatenated summaries are then fed
to the LLM again to generate the final answer.
• MapRerank [8]: This is another RAG method in LangChain.
In MapRerank, the LLM independently generates an an-
swer from each chunk along with a score based on its
confidence that the answer is correct. The answer with
the highest score is picked as the final output.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

Better Better Better Better
Figure 16. CacheBlend has minimal loss in quality compared with full KV recompute, with 5%–18% selective recompute ratio,
with Yi-34B.
0 1 2
0.0
0.2
0.4F1-Score
CPU RAM
0 1 2 3
0.0
0.2
0.4
Slower Disk (4Gbps)
CacheBlend (ours) Full KV Reuse Prefix Caching Full Recomp
TTFT (s)
Figure 17. CacheBlend’s outperforms baselines when using
RAM and slower disks
7.2 Overall Improvement
Reduced TTFT with minimal quality drop: Figure 12
compares the average quality and TTFT across the requests,
where each request has a context of 6 top chunks picked
by lowest L2-distance between the respective embeddings
generated by SentenceTransformers [ 49] (512 tokens per
chunk). As shown in the graph, compared to the full KV
recompute and prefix caching, CacheBlend’s reduction in
F1 and Rouge-L score is within 0.02, while it significantly
reduces the TTFT by 2.2-3.3× across all models and datasets.
While CacheBlend is slower than full KV reuse due to its
selective recomputation, its quality stably outperforms full
KV reuse by a large margin (in many cases more than 2×).
Figure 13 compares CacheBlend with RAG methods in-
cluding MapReduce and MapRerank. Compared to MapRe-
duce, CacheBlend has a 2-5× lower TTFT and higher F1
score.
Higher throughput with lower delay: In Figure 14, we
compare CacheBlend with full KV recompute and prefix
caching on Musique extended and 2WikiMQA datasets un-
der different request rates. CacheBlend achieves lower de-
lay with higher throughput by 2.8-5× than all the baselines
across different models and datasets.
Understanding CacheBlend’s improvement:CacheBlend
is better than all baselines for different reasons. Compared to
the full KV recompute, CacheBlend has a much lower delay
and higher throughput due to only a small amount of tokens
are recomputed. Compared to full KV reuse, although its de-
lay is lower than CacheBlend, the quality drops a lot as full
KV reuse did not perform any of the recompute, thus missing
the cross-attention between different chunks. Compared to
prefix caching, CacheBlend is also better in terms of higher
throughput and lower delay as prefix caching needs to store
multiple versions of KV caches for the same chunk if they
have different prefixes. Thus, given the total storage space is
fixed, prefix caching will incur a higher miss rate.
Finally, compared to other RAG methods, like MapRe-
duce and MapRerank, CacheBlend is also better in terms of
quality or delay. For MapReduce, it has a higher delay than
CacheBlend due to additional LLM inference. Although
MapRerank has slightly lower TTFT than CacheBlend, its
quality is much worse, since processing the input chunks
separately ignores the dependencies between chunks.
7.3 Sensitivity Analysis
For a better understanding of CacheBlend, we further ana-
lyze how varying the configurations impacts overall perfor-
mance.
Varying chunk numbers and lengths: Figure 15a and 15b
show the minimum compute time needed by CacheBlend
to maintain generation quality (≤0.015 loss in F1-score) at
different numbers of chunks and chunk lengths. The exper-
iment is conducted on 2WikiMQA with Mistral-7B model.
As shown in the figure, the compute time reduction ratio re-
mains similar across different numbers of chunks and chunk
length settings.
Varying recompute ratios: Figure 16 shows the impact of
the recompute ratio on the quality-TTFT trade-off across all
datasets on Yi-34B model. Across all the datasets,CacheBlend’s
loss in generation quality is at most 0.002 in F1 score or
Rouge-L score compared to full KV recompute, with 5%~18%
recomputation ratio. To put the number into context, the
5%~18% recomputation ratio can be translated to 4.1-6.6 ×
TTFT reduction compared with full KV-recompute and 3.4-
6.1× TTFT reduction compared with prefix caching.
Varying batch size: Figure 15c shows the compute time
of prefill phase of different batch sizes. It is worth noting
that the time of the decoding phase increases slower than
the prefill phase when the batch size becomes larger [36, 60],
making prefill overhead dominant with increasing batch
size. Therefore, CacheBlend’s improvement over the prefill
phase becomes more prominent to the overall delay reduc-
tion with larger batch sizes.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

Varying storage device: To study the effect of different
storage types on CacheBlend, we modify the underlying
storage devices for every method and conduct a similar ex-
periment as Figure 12 for the Yi-34B model and 2WikiMQA
dataset. As shown in Figure 17, CacheBlend consistently
reduces TTFT with minimal quality degradation when the
KV cache is stored in RAM or a slower SSD device. Notice
that the delay gap between CacheBlend and Full KV reuse
is smaller for slower storage since the delay of CacheBlend
would be more dominated by the loading delay instead of its
partial KV recomputation.
8 Related Work
Retrieval augmented generation (RAG): RAG [22, 23,
37, 46, 48] can enhance the accuracy and reliability of LLMs
with text chunks fetched from external sources. However,
processing these text chunks in the LLM can take a long time.
CacheBlend reduces this overhead by storing and reusing
the KV caches of these text chunks.
KV cache reuse across requests: Storing and reusing
KV cache across different requests have been commonly
studied in recent work [ 24, 33, 41, 42, 59]. Most of these
works [33, 41, 42, 59] focus on prefix-only caching. Prompt-
Cache [24] allows KV cache to be reused at different po-
sitions but fails to maintain satisfying generation quality
due to inaccurate postional encoding and ignorance of cross
attention. CacheBlend adopts a novel partial recomputa-
tion framework to better retain positional accuracies and
cross attention. Most of the existing work stores KV cache
in volatile memory devices for guaranteed performance (e.g.,
GPU HBM, CPU DRAM). While there are emerging research
trying to reuse high-speed NVME SSD for KV caches [21],
CacheBlend is unique in pipelining loading with partial
recomputation and its extension to even slower object store.
General-purpose LLM serving systems: Numerous general-
purpose LLM serving systems have been developed [11, 36,
57, 60]. Orca [57] enables multiple requests to be processed
in parallel with iteration-level scheduling. vLLM [36] further
increases the parallelsim through more efficent GPU mem-
ory management. CacheBlend is complementary to these
general-purpose LLM serving systems, empowering them
with context resuing capabilities.
Context compression methods: Context compression
techniques [19, 31, 32, 43, 55, 58] can be complementary
to CacheBlend. Some of these techniques [31, 32] shorten
the prompt length by prunining the unimportant tokens.
CacheBlend is compatible with such methods in that it
can take different chunk lengths as shown in §7.3. Another
line of work [19, 43, 58] focus on dropping the unimportant
KV vectors based on the attention matrix, which essentially
reduce the KV cache size.CacheBlend can benifit from such
techniques by storing and loading less KV cache.
9 Limitations and Future Work
Our method in this paper (e.g., the insights in § 4.3) cur-
rently only applies to language models with transformer
structures. We leave investigation of architectures other than
transformer such as Mamba [26] and Griffin [17] for future
work. In our evaluation, we haven’t testedCacheBlend’s
performance on more models and datasets with different
quantization settings. For better understanding and improve-
ment of the method, we have open-sourced our work to
facilitate more effort in this direction.
In this paper, we integrated CacheBlend in vLLM but
have not yet tested CacheBlend’s performance on the latest
serving engines like Distserve[ 60] or StableGen [ 11]. Nor
have we studied how to apply CacheBlend to workloads
that share KV cache across different compute nodes. Since
CacheBlend is able to reduce the costly prefill phase, we
believe combining CacheBlend with these new serving en-
gines could potentially bring more savings. We leave the
integration of CacheBlend into these novel inference frame-
works for future work.
10 Conclusion
We present CacheBlend, a system that combines multiple
pre-computed KV caches, when their corresponding texts
are concatenated in the LLM input. To preserve generation
quality, CacheBlend recovers the cross-attention among
these texts by selectively recomputing the KV cache values
of a small fraction of tokens. Through experiments across
four datasets and three models, CacheBlend reduces TTFT
by 2.2-3.3× and increases throughput by 2.8-5×, compared to
full KV recompute, under negligible quality drop. The code
is available at https://github.com/LMCache/LMCache.
11 Acknowledgement
We thank all the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd,
Thaleia Dimitra Doudali, for their insightful feedback and
suggestions. The project is funded by NSF CNS-2146496,
CNS-2131826, CNS-2313190, CNS-1901466, CNS-2313190,
CCF-2119184, CNS-1956180, and research awards from Google,
CERES Center, Conviva, and Chameleon Cloud.
References
[1] 12 Practical Large Language Model (LLM) Applications - Techopedia.
https://www.techopedia.com/12-practical-large-language-model-l
lm-applications. (Accessed on 09/21/2023).
[2] [2302.13971] llama: Open and efficient foundation language models.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971. (Accessed on 09/21/2023).
[3] 7 top large language model use cases and applications. https://www.
projectpro.io/article/large-language-model-use-cases-and-applicati
ons/887. (Accessed on 09/21/2023).
[4] Applications of large language models - indata labs. https://indatalabs
.com/blog/large-language-model-apps. (Accessed on 09/21/2023).
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

[5] Chains. https://python.langchain.com/docs/modules/chains/.
[6] Evaluating qa: Metrics, predictions, and the null response. https:
//github.com/fastforwardlabs/ff14_blog/blob/master/_notebooks/20
20-06-09-Evaluating_BERT_on_SQuAD.ipynb.
[7] Langchain: Map reduce. https://api.python.langchain.com/en/latest/c
hains/langchain.chains.combine_documents.map_reduce.MapReduc
eDocumentsChain.html#langchain.chains.combine_documents.ma
p_reduce.MapReduceDocumentsChain.
[8] Langchain: Map rerank. https://api.python.langchain.com/en/latest/c
hains/langchain.chains.combine_documents.map_rerank.MapReran
kDocumentsChain.html.
[9] Real-world use cases for large language models (llms) | by cellstrat |
medium. https://cellstrat.medium.com/real-world-use-cases-for-lar
ge-language-models-llms-d71c3a577bf2. (Accessed on 09/21/2023).
[10] Runpod: Cloud compute made easy. https://www.runpod.io/, 2024.
Accessed: 2024-05-21.
[11] Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra,
Bhargav S. Gulavani, and Ramachandran Ramjee. Sarathi: Efficient
llm inference by piggybacking decodes with chunked prefills, 2023.
[12] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian
Huang, Zhengxiao Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong,
Jie Tang, and Juanzi Li. Longbench: A bilingual, multitask benchmark
for long context understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14508, 2023.
[13] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[14] Beidi Chen, Tri Dao, Eric Winsor, Zhao Song, Atri Rudra, and Christo-
pher Ré. Scatterbrain: Unifying sparse and low-rank attention. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:17413–17426, 2021.
[15] Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou
Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz
Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, et al. Rethinking attention with performers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14794, 2020.
[16] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma,
Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung,
Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm: Scaling language
modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
[17] Soham De, Samuel L. Smith, Anushan Fernando, Aleksandar Botev,
George Cristian-Muraru, Albert Gu, Ruba Haroun, Leonard Berrada,
Yutian Chen, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Guillaume Desjardins, Arnaud
Doucet, David Budden, Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, Nando De
Freitas, and Caglar Gulcehre. Griffin: Mixing gated linear recurrences
with local attention for efficient language models, 2024.
[18] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. Mapreduce: simplified data pro-
cessing on large clusters. Communications of the ACM, 51(1):107–113,
2008.
[19] Harry Dong, Xinyu Yang, Zhenyu Zhang, Zhangyang Wang, Yuejie
Chi, and Beidi Chen. Get more with less: Synthesizing recurrence
with kv cache compression for efficient llm inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.09398, 2024.
[20] Alexander R Fabbri, Irene Li, Tianwei She, Suyi Li, and Dragomir R
Radev. Multi-news: A large-scale multi-document summariza-
tion dataset and abstractive hierarchical model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.01749, 2019.
[21] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevdjic,
Junbo Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. Attentionstore:
Cost-effective attention reuse across multi-turn conversations in large
language model serving, 2024.
[22] Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi,
Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation
for large language models: A survey, 2023.
[23] Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi,
Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation
for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997,
2023.
[24] In Gim, Guojun Chen, Seung seob Lee, Nikhil Sarda, Anurag Khan-
delwal, and Lin Zhong. Prompt cache: Modular attention reuse for
low-latency inference, 2023.
[25] Bogdan Gliwa, Iwona Mochol, Maciej Biesek, and Aleksander Wawer.
Samsum corpus: A human-annotated dialogue dataset for abstractive
summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12237, 2019.
[26] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
selective state spaces, 2023.
[27] Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko
Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive eval-
uation of reasoning steps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060, 2020.
[28] Coleman Hooper, Sehoon Kim, Hiva Mohammadzadeh, Michael W Ma-
honey, Yakun Sophia Shao, Kurt Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. Kvquant:
Towards 10 million context length llm inference with kv cache quanti-
zation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18079, 2024.
[29] Muhammad Jan. Optimize rag efficiency with llamaindex: The perfect
chunk size. https://datasciencedojo.com/blog/rag-with-llamaindex/,
october 2023.
[30] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford,
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna
Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
[31] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu.
Llmlingua: Compressing prompts for accelerated inference of large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05736, 2023.
[32] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo, Dongsheng Li, Chin-Yew Lin,
Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Longllmlingua: Accelerating and enhancing
llms in long context scenarios via prompt compression, 2023.
[33] Chao Jin, Zili Zhang, Xuanlin Jiang, Fangyue Liu, Xin Liu, Xuanzhe
Liu, and Xin Jin. Ragcache: Efficient knowledge caching for retrieval-
augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12457, 2024.
[34] Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity
search with GPUs, 2017.
[35] Hao Kang, Qingru Zhang, Souvik Kundu, Geonhwa Jeong, Zaoxing
Liu, Tushar Krishna, and Tuo Zhao. Gear: An efficient kv cache com-
pression recipe for near-lossless generative inference of llm, 2024.
[36] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
Efficient memory management for large language model serving with
pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, pages 611–626, 2023.
[37] Huayang Li, Yixuan Su, Deng Cai, Yan Wang, and Lemao Liu. A
survey on retrieval-augmented text generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.01110, 2022.
[38] Chaofan Lin, Chengruidong Zhang Zhenhua Han, Yuqing Yang, Fan
Yang, Chen Chen, and Lili Qiu. Parrot: Efficient serving of llm-based
applications with semantic variable. In 18th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24) , Santa Clara,
CA, July 2024. USENIX Association.
[39] Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of sum-
maries. In Text Summarization Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona,
Spain, July 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[40] Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele
Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How
language models use long contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03172,
2023.
[41] Shu Liu, Asim Biswal, Audrey Cheng, Xiangxi Mo, Shiyi Cao, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Matei Zaharia. Optimizing llm queries in
relational workloads, 2024.
[42] Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Kuntai Du, Jiayi Yao, Yihua Cheng, Yuyang
Huang, Shan Lu, Michael Maire, Henry Hoffmann, Ari Holtzman, et al.
Cachegen: Fast context loading for language model applications.arXiv
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

preprint arXiv:2310.07240, 2023.
[43] Zichang Liu, Aditya Desai, Fangshuo Liao, Weitao Wang, Victor Xie,
Zhaozhuo Xu, Anastasios Kyrillidis, and Anshumali Shrivastava. Scis-
sorhands: Exploiting the persistence of importance hypothesis for llm
kv cache compression at test time. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[44] Zichang Liu, Jue Wang, Tri Dao, Tianyi Zhou, Binhang Yuan, Zhao
Song, Anshumali Shrivastava, Ce Zhang, Yuandong Tian, Christopher
Re, et al. Deja vu: Contextual sparsity for efficient llms at inference
time. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 22137–
22176. PMLR, 2023.
[45] Zirui Liu, Jiayi Yuan, Hongye Jin, Shaochen Zhong, Zhaozhuo Xu,
Vladimir Braverman, Beidi Chen, and Xia Hu. Kivi: A tuning-free asym-
metric 2bit quantization for kv cache. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02750,
2024.
[46] Yuning Mao, Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Yelong Shen, Jianfeng Gao,
Jiawei Han, and Weizhu Chen. Generation-augmented retrieval for
open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08553 ,
2020.
[47] Jason Phang, Haokun Liu, and Samuel R Bowman. Fine-tuned trans-
formers show clusters of similar representations across layers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.08406, 2021.
[48] Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon
Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Yoav Shoham. In-context retrieval-
augmented language models. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 11:1316–1331, 2023.
[49] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings
using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for
Computational Linguistics, 11 2019.
[50] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and
Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position
embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
[51] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish
Sabharwal. Musique: Multihop questions via single-hop question
composition, 2022.
[52] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention
Is All You Need, 2023.
[53] Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yinmin Zhong, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu,
and Xin Jin. Loongserve: Efficiently serving long-context large lan-
guage models with elastic sequence parallelism, 2024.
[54] Peng Xu, Wei Ping, Xianchao Wu, Lawrence McAfee, Chen Zhu, Zihan
Liu, Sandeep Subramanian, Evelina Bakhturina, Mohammad Shoeybi,
and Bryan Catanzaro. Retrieval meets long context large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03025, 2023.
[55] Wangsong Yin, Mengwei Xu, Yuanchun Li, and Xuanzhe Liu. Llm as a
system service on mobile devices, 2024.
[56] Alex Young, Bei Chen, Chao Li, Chengen Huang, Ge Zhang, Guanwei
Zhang, Heng Li, Jiangcheng Zhu, Jianqun Chen, Jing Chang, et al. Yi:
Open foundation models by 01. ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04652 ,
2024.
[57] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim,
and Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A distributed serving system for
{Transformer-Based} generative models. In 16th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) , pages
521–538, 2022.
[58] Zhenyu Zhang, Ying Sheng, Tianyi Zhou, Tianlong Chen, Lianmin
Zheng, Ruisi Cai, Zhao Song, Yuandong Tian, Christopher Ré, Clark
Barrett, et al. H2o: Heavy-hitter oracle for efficient generative in-
ference of large language models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[59] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Jeff Huang, Chuyue
Sun, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E
Gonzalez, et al. Efficiently programming large language models using
sglang. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07104, 2023.
[60] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. Distserve: Disaggregating prefill
and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model serving.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.09670, 2024.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

A N-dimensional positional recovery
Here we prove our positional recovery method can work in
the N-dimensional scenario. We start with the definition of
RoPE in N-dimensional space.
Definition 1 (Rotary Positional Encoding, ROPE[50]). Let
vectors 𝑞, 𝑘 ∈ R𝑑 denote the query vector and key vector need to
be embedded at some position m as 𝑞𝑚, 𝑘𝑚 ∈ R𝑑 . Rope encodes
the positional information as the following:
𝑞𝑚, 𝑘𝑚 = R𝑑
Θ,𝑚{𝑞, 𝑘}
where
R𝑑
Θ,𝑚 =
©­­­­­­­­­­­
«
cos 𝑚𝜃0 − sin 𝑚𝜃0 ... 0 0
sin 𝑚𝜃0 cos 𝑚𝜃0 ... 0 0
...
...
. . .
...
...
0 0
... cos 𝑚𝜃 𝑑
2 −1 − sin 𝑚𝜃 𝑑
2 −1
0 0
... sin 𝑚𝜃 𝑑
2 −1 cos 𝑚𝜃 𝑑
2 −1
ª®®®®®®®®®®®
¬
is the rotary matrix with hyperparameter Θ ∈ { 𝜃𝑖 = 10000−2𝑖𝑑 , 𝑖 ∈
[0, 1, ..., 𝑑
2 − 1] }
The reason why our positional recovery method can work
is because attention score between a pair of tokens is in-
varaint to their absolute positions. Below is the proof of this
invariance.
Proposition A.1 (Rope only depends on relative position).
Let vector 𝑘 ∈ R𝑑 denote a key vector and 𝑘𝑚 ∈ R𝑑 denote the
key vector embedded at the fixed position m. And let vector
𝑞 ∈ R𝑑 denote a query vector and 𝑞𝑚+𝑙 ∈ R𝑑 denote the query
vector embedded at position (m+l). Then attention score𝑞𝑚+𝑙𝑘𝑚
is derived as follow
𝑞𝑚+𝑙𝑘𝑚 = (R𝑑
Θ,𝑚+𝑙𝑞)
𝑇
(R𝑑
Θ,𝑚𝑘)
=
𝑑/2−1∑︁
𝑖=0
(𝑞 [2𝑖 ]𝑘 [2𝑖 ] cos(𝑚 + 𝑙 − 𝑚)𝜃𝑖
+ 𝑞 [2𝑖+1]𝑘 [2𝑖+1] cos(𝑚 + 𝑙 − 𝑚)𝜃𝑖 )
=
𝑑/2−1∑︁
𝑖=0
(𝑞 [2𝑖 ]𝑘 [2𝑖 ] + 𝑞 [2𝑖+1]𝑘 [2𝑖+1]) cos 𝑙𝜃 𝑖
(1)
where {𝑞, 𝑘}[𝑖 ] denotes i-th entry of vectors {𝑞, 𝑘} and ℎ𝑖 de-
notes dot product 𝑞𝑖𝑘𝑖 . The attention score𝑞𝑚+𝑙𝑘𝑚 only depends
on the relative distance 𝑙 rather than the absolute position 𝑚.
16